Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager for
Development Tools,
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
Good morning.
It's good to see that on a
Friday morning we get as many of you
here for an early morning session.
How's the show been going for you?
Good.
Great.
We've talked to you over the course
of the week on various technologies
in our frameworks and applications.
We've seen Jaguar and all the
new things we're doing there.
Today we're going to be focusing
on a lot more of the tools in terms
of their detail aspects and how
to use them and stuff like that.
So for the first session today
we're going to talk about
developing for performance.
And to do that I want
to introduce Joe Sokle,
the manager of the
Core OS Performance Group.
Hi, good morning.
Hope everyone had a fun time
at the beer bash last night.
Maybe be a little bit awake
this morning for this.
Anyway, I am Joe Sokol, and I'm going to
Man, that's very sensitive.
Okay.
So today we're going to actually
talk a little bit about performance
philosophy as opposed to the actual
APIs and things that you might
use to make your applications go.
So the philosophy that we've kind of
chosen to follow here is that improving
system performance is like a diet.
It's a never-ending battle.
Once you start down this road,
you've just got to kind
of stay with the fight.
And just like a diet,
it's a lot easier to do if
you're participating in a group.
[Transcript missing]
To win this battle,
we need to look at using our
system resources efficiently,
both when the app is quiescent
and when it's actively
running and doing something.
Now, quiescent does not necessarily
mean that it's in the background.
That app could be in the foreground.
If the user is not interacting with it,
it has no work to do,
it should do just that.
It should take no system resources.
When the app is active,
we'd like you to use the system resources
as efficiently as possible to implement
whatever work that you have to do.
You also need to pay attention,
basically what we're asking you to do
is pay attention to the fundamentals.
Okay,
so these are things that everyone has
learned as an engineer through the years,
but sometimes we forget,
and what we want to do is
really focus on why this is
important to system performance.
There are no magic APIs.
You know,
I cannot give you an API that basically
puts you on a slim-fast diet and
makes your application more efficient,
right?
It's up to you guys to actually
go and take a look at what's
going on and make changes in how
you're utilizing these resources.
Okay, so basically we're going to go
through this in three stages today.
I'm going to do a brief description
of the difference between performance
and efficiency and why you care
about both of these concepts.
We're going to talk about the fundamental
elements of system performance.
So these are the three things when
I'm referring to system resources.
These are basically the three
things that we're talking about:
use of the CPU, use of memory,
and use of file system.
And at the end,
we're going to go through some
processes and some lists of
tools on how to evaluate your
use of these system resources.
Okay, so performance and efficiency.
They're not synonymous.
People get these confused all the time.
Performance is a result of efficiency.
So the more efficient you
make your application,
the better it's going to perform
in a variety of environments,
not just in a kind of stand-alone
test bed that you might be looking at.
And performance does not
guarantee efficiency.
So you may go and really work
hard to make your app perform
and meet certain criteria that
your customers are asking for,
but that does not necessarily guarantee
that it's doing it in an efficient way.
And in fact, often that's what happens.
You set a performance goal,
you reach that goal, and then you stop.
You may be using -- consuming
100% or 90% of the system
available resources at that point,
but you've met your performance goal.
The processes for improving
both are very similar.
We will address that in the
third portion of this talk.
We will also talk about why you should
care about each of these points as we go.
So what is performance?
It's the speed at which
operations complete,
right?
It's something that is measurable.
It's something that is
perceived by the user,
which is why you care,
because it's also something that the user
is going to call in and complain about,
right,
if it doesn't meet his requirements.
Some common performance metrics
that are used to measure this,
to measure how well you're doing,
would be things like throughput,
you know, so bytes per second,
so maybe how fast you can move
that file across the network.
Operations per second,
so that would be maybe like the number
of frames per second that you could draw
on the screen for maybe like a game,
something like that.
And of course, latency,
which is pretty much what
the user always sees,
right?
It's the response time.
So he sees all of these things
as a request that then takes some
amount of time to actually complete,
and, you know,
that's really what interests him.
So how long does he have to sit in
front of the screen there and wait
for that operation to complete?
So what is efficiency?
Efficiency in this context is really
the cost to complete an operation.
For any one of those given
operations that your app is
making many thousands of,
what was the cost in system resources?
It minimizes the use of system resources.
If you have an efficient algorithm,
it tends to minimize the
use of system resources.
Efficiency in this context is really
the cost to complete an operation.
For any one of those given
operations that your app is
making many thousands of,
what was the cost in system resources?
It minimizes the use of system resources.
If you have an efficient algorithm,
it tends to minimize the
use of system resources.
Efficiency in this context is really
the cost to complete an operation.
For any one of those given
operations that your app is
making many thousands of,
what was the cost in system resources?
It minimizes the use of system resources.
If you have an efficient algorithm,
it tends to minimize the
use of system resources.
Efficiency in this context is really
the cost to complete an operation.
For any one of those given
operations that your app is
making many thousands of,
what was the cost in system resources?
It minimizes the use of system resources.
If you have an efficient algorithm,
generally we look at it as an average.
The memory footprint,
which is probably the most
critical of the three to look at,
because that kind of dictates
whether or not things are really
going to operate efficiently,
and IO frequency.
So how frequently are you going to
the disk and for what size operations?
Okay, so this all kind of rolls
up into system performance.
System performance,
when we talk about that,
what we're really talking about,
it's a result of all the individual
apps and OS efficiencies,
right?
So when you roll that all together and
you take a look at a system and it's
got 20 applications running on it,
it has a bunch of stuff that
the system is also doing,
that really dictates how well
the system or the efficiencies
of what you're doing there really
dictate what the system is doing.
So if you're working set size exceeds
the amount of physical memory you have,
I mean,
the system performance just tanks.
I mean, it's not a slow drop-off.
It just becomes, you know,
pretty much unusable.
Why is this important to you?
Because the system performance
affects the user's perception of any
individual application performance.
So you guys can work really hard to
make your app perform really well.
But if you've tested that in isolation
and you haven't mixed it in with other
applications to see how they affect it
and what the system is going to do to it,
when the user actually uses it,
they may see a very different thing,
right?
Your testers are telling you, "Hey,
we meet all of the
performance goals that we set.
Everything looks cool." All of
your customers are telling you,
"Hey, you know,
this thing just doesn't rock," right?
It's not performing the way you
claim it's going to perform.
So how do we go about improving this?
Because that's really the -- Yeah.
-- the nut here.
All right.
We focus on the fundamentals.
Okay.
There are three fundamentals that really
control how well the system is going
to perform and how efficient your app.
It's your use of the CPU.
It's how much memory you're
actually tying up in a working set.
And it's how much file system
I/O that you're initiating.
When you look at it
from that perspective,
I mean, that -- every system performance
problem that I look at,
right, it always boils down to
one of these three things.
All right, in looking at the CPU...
There are two models
that are commonly used.
And I know that we've been
driving this point home,
I think, throughout the conference.
I was at the Carbon event session.
And we're asking you to be event-driven.
This is really a good way to
control your appetite for the CPU.
The important thing here is
that only real work is done.
So when you get an event,
you respond to the event, right?
You do the work that's necessary.
You do it in an efficient way,
and then you go back to sleep.
The app can become totally idle,
which is a really good thing.
We're going to talk about a couple of
implications of that here in a second.
The other way to go is
more of a polling model.
And the thing that's really
bad about this is that often,
in fact,
the majority of the time when you poll,
there's actually no
real work for you to do.
You run around your polling
loop looking for things to do,
and the majority of the time,
there's no real work to do.
So, it's a pretty inefficient
use of the resource.
Now, the other thing that happens with
the CPU is every time you use it,
right, you're causing memory and
possibly the disk to be accessed.
So, it's a, you know, it's a VM system.
You don't know whether or not that
piece of memory you're touching is
really physically present or not,
or it's going to have
to come in off the disk.
So why event-driven?
So really, fundamentally,
what's really good about this?
In terms of the fundamentals, anyway,
it minimizes the working set.
It just, if you're only responding to
events and only doing the work
that's absolutely necessary,
you're going to touch a lot less pages.
Touching less pages means that there's
less paging going on in the system.
It just means the system is going
to feel that much more responsive.
Another point that you might not think
about is the ability of the system
to aggressively manage its power.
In Mac OS X,
we do all of our power management
basically in the idle thread.
So the system has to go idle before
we can start to make use of any
of the little hardware tricks for
napping or dozing the processor or
possibly doing frequency shifting
if that processor is capable of
doing that or it needs to be done.
And the more aggressively
we can manage power,
the longer a battery lasts
in a portable-- and the fan
just comes on less often,
too, and like your TI.
So, you know, that's a good thing, too.
People complain about that.
They don't realize there's
a fan in there until,
you know, the system is able to do that.
The system has been
banging around for a while.
And there are more CPU cycles
available to do real work.
So if you're not using the CPU to
just go pull for things to do,
that leaves CPU cycles available
for other applications.
And why not to pull?
So it's just the converse.
When you're pulling,
you're basically keeping a
larger working set heated.
And that means there's going to
be more contention for memory.
When it's a single app doing this,
it's easy to say, you know,
it doesn't really matter that
I'm going around this loop
and making a few API calls and
touching a little bit of memory.
You know, what can that hurt?
But when you think about it in the
context of there are 20 applications
running or 30 systems running on the
system that people have started up,
forgotten about,
and they're sitting in the background,
it starts to add up and it starts to make
for quite a bit of contention for memory.
More contention for memory, more paging.
If the system is paging,
it's a sluggish system.
It's just not going to perform very well.
And then back to our
power management point.
The system,
if we kind of take this to an extreme,
the system may never become idle,
or it may be idle for only
short periods of time,
not enough for us to really do
anything with the power management,
so the power management
may be compromised.
And, you know, the battery life shrinks.
The fan is on all the time.
And people are unhappy about that.
But that's a part of
system performance that,
you know, people pay attention to, right?
How long that battery lasts.
And it's an inefficient
use of system resources.
You're going to be using the CPU,
touching memory,
possibly causing pages to come
in off the disk to find out that
you don't have anything to do.
There isn't really anything
more inefficient than that.
I mean,
that's just about as bad as it gets.
All right, so touching memory.
So we've got this CPU.
He's executing some instructions.
What happens?
All right.
So if everything is like really
operating nice and tight in your cache,
you're just sitting in this L1 cache
and you're just banging away at it.
The TLB there is the translation
look-aside buffer for doing
the virtual to physical address
translations at the CPU level.
That's a good place to be.
As memory use expands,
then you get into maybe the L2 cache,
the L3 cache.
Now you're down to memory.
We've color-coded this so
you can see that as we move
further down the chain here,
things get slower and slower.
So at this point, if we're actually
executing out of memory,
so if our working set,
if the set of memory that we're touching
has exceeded those first level caches,
if we're executing out of memory,
we're running ten times
slower than the L1.
And it's actually probably a little
worse than that on a faster processor.
If we're actually hitting the disk,
right,
to go get data or to go get code that
has to be executed in that polling loop,
you're now running 10,000
times slower than the L1.
So you can see why you want
to stay out of that case.
The other thing to note is that if
you just touch one byte of memory,
it has a lot bigger
impact than you think.
Caches are organized
around 32-byte cache lines,
right?
So to get that one byte in,
you're evicting another cache
line all through the L1,
L2, and L3.
The TLB table is built around pages,
right?
So if you have to address a
byte in a virtual page that it
currently doesn't have an entry for,
it's going to evict an entry in
order to make that translation.
And that basically represents a
4K set of addresses that are being
tossed in terms of translation.
Memory.
Memory,
we allocate everything in 4K pages.
So the minimal size physical page of
memory that you're going to get when
you touch a byte is going to be 4K.
So that means, again,
your byte basically is causing
4K worth of data to be evicted.
And the disk is managed the same way
in terms of 4K pages to back that.
But, again, up around the processor,
if you can keep your memory
appetite small and you can
keep everything in the caches,
or worst case, in the memory,
the system performs a lot better.
Once it goes to the disk, things get bad.
All right, so now let's move on to,
memory.
All right, so again,
in terms of the fundamental
thing that we're looking at here,
it's really the working set.
This is really the thing that
controls system performance.
And basically,
a working set are the pages
that are being actively
touched by the application.
So these could be in RAM--
hopefully they're in RAM-- but
could be out on the disk also.
And let me tell you,
when you're working sets--
if you have a set of pages,
a set of memory that you have
to go pounding through in
order to complete an operation,
and you can't get it all to
fit into your physical RAM,
that's a bad place to be.
You have to be aware of that fact
that if you're banging on memory,
it may actually be
coming in off of a disk.
What does the working set
consist of in this case?
Well,
it would be all of your heap or heaps
and any code that you're executing.
Every API that you use increases
the size of your working set,
right.
Sometimes it has long-term effects.
So sometimes it's short-term like
it's -- you're heating up stack pages,
running some code, other times, though,
it's actually leaving
memory allocations behind,
right, so like window buffers,
which can be quite large.
So, again, be aware of the fact that
each API you use has a cost.
Leaks.
Leaks increase size
via heap fragmentation.
So --
Interestingly, as we've moved along in
the OS development and the
OS has become more stable,
applications have become more stable,
we've implemented things like
sleep capabilities for the system.
People are not rebooting their systems
nearly as often as they used to.
People are not quitting
their apps either.
So what ends up happening is you now have
applications that are very long-lived.
They may be actually running for
weeks at a time before they either
quit or the system is rebooted.
Time is your enemy when you have a leak.
Even if the leak is slow,
eventually it will start to build up.
What will happen is,
depending upon your usage patterns
of how you're allocating memory
and how those leaks are showing up,
it may actually be increasing
the size of your working set.
So if the leak doesn't all happen
at once and just get paged out,
then you're going to
have a lot of problems.
You can look at your application,
and even if it's a slow leak,
go after it and get rid of it.
Another thing that you can assume is that
long-term caches are always paged out.
So if you're creating a cache
and it's building up over time,
when you go back to access it,
be very careful in how you do this.
Try to avoid walking
through the whole cache.
If you can just do cache lookups into it,
that's fine.
But when you're doing maintenance,
be aware that when you go
running through the whole cache,
Most likely,
a really high degree of probability,
it's been paged out,
which means you're going to
page it all back in to do some
little bit of maintenance.
You need to really be aware of that and
make sure that if you do have to do it,
do it in a way that's efficient and
that you're not doing it too frequently.
Best performance when
all the pages are in RAM.
Again, can't stress that enough.
The system performs a lot
better if it's not paging.
So how does your memory
appetite and the VM,
how do they interact?
Well, here's the problem.
Typically,
40% of the pages of the system are dirty.
So these are valid pages that some
application wants to keep a hold on,
but they're dirty.
They've been written to,
which means that we're going to have
to write those pages to disk whenever
unused pages are not available.
New memory is accessed,
so if you go and allocate a new big chunk
of memory and then go and access it,
the very first time you access it,
we're going to have to provide
you some physical pages.
Well, those physical pages have
to come from someplace,
and the system is going to go through,
and there's an LRU to keep track
of working sets and all that.
But basically, when the system is
running kind of saturated,
we're going to have to page pages out.
So when you initiate file I/O,
that's also going to
possibly trigger this.
And of course, when you're paging in,
you're paging -- this is the worst case.
If you're paging -- you're paging
pages back in that you need,
and we're having to page pages out
in order to make room for them,
right?
So you're getting a dual kind
of I/O going on there that
you don't want to have happen.
Clean pages in the
system are just stolen,
but again, 40% of the time,
when we go to steal a page,
we're going to have to write it out when
the system is kind of in a steady state,
you know, fully used or utilized
in terms of memory.
All right, so let's talk a little bit
about working set impact.
So here's a way to basically organize
a cache that is probably fairly common,
where you have a header.
attached to some data,
and you just kind of
allocate the whole thing,
chain them together, and hopefully,
you know, get some use out of the cache.
But the thing to remember here is
that each time you touch any portion
of that item--so this element--you're
bringing the whole page in.
So if you just need to run the
list to update timestamps or,
you know,
do some other maintenance on it,
and you're not actually
even--you're not actively looking
at the data at that point,
you're still causing the
whole page to be brought in.
So if you had a cache with, say,
you know, 10,000 elements and
it organized this way,
and you chose to run through
and do some maintenance on it,
you're touching, you know,
basically 10,000 pages of memory.
Unlikely that that will be sitting in the
cache or sitting in memory at this point.
So here's another way to organize it that
reduces that in the case where you're
having to do these maintenance functions.
Break out the headers into
their own separate allocation,
right?
Point them off to the data.
So at least in the case where
you're having to go through the
headers to do something with
the timestamps or whatever,
it minimizes the impact
on the working set.
Now, with that said,
there is still a downside
to going this route.
There's a downside to it,
and that's one of the things
that you have to be aware of,
which is if you're allocating these
things into your cache over time,
so if there's a lot of temporal
spacing between the allocations and
between the insertions into the cache,
you're not really going to
help if you do each of these
headers independently because,
again, they'll spread out
through your working set,
and we'll end up with each one of those
little headers being in its own page,
right, but mixed in with other things,
not with your data,
and it won't have accomplished anything.
So in this case,
if you absolutely have to have a cache,
when you break it into
this kind of organization,
make sure you cluster
allocate those headers.
So, you know,
ask the system for enough memory
so that you can have 100 headers,
right?
And then you keep track
of that and dole them out,
right, as the cache grows.
And when you run out,
you ask the system for enough
memory for another 100 headers,
so at least you keep
the headers compressed,
right, in terms of the amount of physical
memory that they're sitting on.
So that's a lot better way to do it.
that.
Okay, so now we're done with memory.
Moving on to file system I/O.
All right,
so sequential versus random file I/O.
This is an interesting thing.
Again, we've kind of come to
expect that disks are fast.
The kind of modern disks that we
ship now are easily able to do,
you know,
40 megabytes per second sequential,
a single disk.
But that's going purely sequential,
which we often don't do in the system.
And in fact, when we're paging,
we never do.
when we're paging, we're doing much more
random accesses on the disk.
And disks really have not gotten
any faster in the last six,
seven years, eight years.
They really don't
randomly seek much faster.
And basically,
the throughput that you can get out
of a disk that's purely random is
only around 0.4 megabytes per second.
So it's about 1% of the
sequential throughput.
It's about 100 IOs per second.
That's really kind of pushing it.
That's like a 7200 RPM drive, right?
Some of the slower drives in a
Mac OS X system are really pushing it.
But if you're using a portable
that don't spin that fast
because of power considerations,
they're not going to even yield this.
So that's just something to keep in
mind when you're accessing files,
too, that, you know,
sequential access patterns are a lot
better than random access patterns.
Now, larger I/Os are more
efficient up to a point.
We really like you to
not do one-byte reads.
That's not a very efficient way to get
your data out of the file system cache.
So larger I/O requests
are more efficient,
but the thing to remember about this is
that your I/O buffer that you've created
and that you're sucking data into,
that is eventually-- I mean,
that basically consists of dirty
pages after the I/O is completed,
or while the I/O is completing.
So a reasonable size is 128K.
I mean, that's--you know,
it could be smaller.
It could be a little bit larger.
That's a pretty reasonable size that
will pay back good dividends in terms
of the efficiencies making the requests,
but doesn't get too much
in the way of the system in
terms of a lot of dirty pages.
Again, taking--you know,
taking this kind of
thought to an extreme,
if you were to create
an I/O buffer that was,
say, I don't know, 32 megabytes in size,
and you issue a single read
of 32 megabytes to fill it,
because you've got files
that are gigabytes in size,
and you think, "Well, Joe said, you know,
"bigger is better when it comes to I/O,
"so let me go to 32 megabytes." Well,
what would happen there potentially
is that as the I/O is completing--
because it doesn't all complete at once,
right?
Early pages are being filled with data.
As the I/Os are completing,
we're releasing those
pages back to the system.
By the time that you actually get
control back that your read is completed,
if the system is busy doing other things,
we may have paged those
pages out for you,
right?
So your I/O buffer is now
sitting out in the swap file.
And when you come back to touch it,
right,
you're gonna pay the cost of sucking
it back in off the paging device again.
So you'll actually end up with, you know,
doing at least two I/Os there,
probably more,
because we'll probably also be paging
stuff out again to make room for it.
So that's why I say, you know,
it's up to a point.
You don't want to take
this to an extreme.
Another way to go would be to
investigate doing some file
mapping for reading large files.
So in the Cocoa world, I know this is,
you know, this is kind of the norm.
In the Carbon world, you know,
this may not be something
that you're used to doing,
but it's something that you
should investigate using the,
you know, the basic system primitives
for actually mapping files
and touching them in that way.
The interesting thing about this,
of course,
is that you don't create any dirty pages.
If you're just reading, the pages,
you know, are brought into the system,
but they're not dirty.
They can just be tossed if they need
to be tossed in order to make room.
We don't have to page them out.
And if you go back and
retouch the memory,
we just go back to the backing file and,
you know, retrieve it from there.
There's no swapping involved at all.
[Transcript missing]
in 10, we're actually keeping track of
the access times in those cases.
And those access times
are part of the metadata.
Now, we don't write those out right away,
but every 30 seconds,
the update process is gonna run,
and it's gonna issue a sync on
the system to try to sync out
anything interesting to the disk.
And it's gonna go ahead and sweep all
those up and sync them out to the disk.
So if you're sitting there polling,
looking for some work to do
by enumerating the directory,
looking for a file-- you know, say,
waiting for a file to appear,
basically what you're causing
to happen is every 30 seconds,
we're gonna write the disk.
Okay, that's gonna keep the
disks from going to sleep.
So that's not such a good thing.
A better way to do that would be to
stat the file or do a getcat info
and look at its modification date,
look at the directory's modification
date to see whether it's changed or not.
Because the stats,
just retrieving the information
about that directory doesn't
cause the access date to change.
So-- in that case,
you could sit there and keep, you know,
accessing,
looking to see whether anything
new has come into the directory,
but you're not having any
impact on the file system in
terms of IOs going to the disk.
[Transcript missing]
you have to be aware as developers
that your application may actually
be living out on a server.
Or if it's not living on the server,
maybe the preference files or your
history files or your cache files that
you're creating actually are ending
up on a networked server someplace,
not on a local disk.
So you need to take
that into consideration.
You need to probably make-- well, you do.
It's not probably.
You need to test with that in mind.
So when you're doing your final
testing to see how things perform,
make sure you do some testing with things
targeted to networked file systems,
not just off the local disk,
'cause that's the way your
customer is gonna use it.
And basically,
the thing to remember-- network
performance is unpredictable,
right?
So again,
if you're designing something that is
predicated on your ability to predict how
long the I/O is gonna take to complete,
then you need to really
make your customer aware,
then, that he needs those files
to live on a local disk,
that he cannot have them sitting
out on a network store someplace.
And then the third point here is polling
models tend to overwhelm networks.
Again, when it's one or two or three
machines that are doing it,
it's not too bad.
When it's 2,000, 3,000,
4,000 machines in a K-12, you know,
institute or higher ed institute or,
you know, a larger corporation,
the network administrators
really dislike that,
right?
If you're sitting there constantly,
banging on the net,
looking to see whether a file
has come into existence or not,
you know,
that's just not a very good thing to do.
All right, so...
The big message here,
the fundamentals are important.
It's the most important thing
that you can be looking at,
right, is that your app does
not run in isolation.
Your app affects and is
affected by other apps.
That's basically what we're saying
here is that when you're testing,
don't assume that just because you've
reached a certain level of performance
or efficiency that that is adequate,
right, testing in isolation.
You need to really look at it, you know,
with some other typical applications
that your customers might be running
when they're running your application.
And app efficiency,
this directly drives system performance.
We can provide you very efficient APIs,
which we really don't do yet,
but we're working on it.
But even if we did,
if the app is intent on
using a lot of memory,
there's not a lot we can do about it.
There's only so fast that we can
move pages in and off of a disk,
right?
Most of our systems ship with one disk.
You know, there's contention for just
normal file system mixed in with
all the paging that's going on.
Really, the only way to keep
the system performance,
you know, adequate is to everyone,
you know, stay on this diet, right,
and really control your
appetite for memory.
Minimizing the working size.
I mean, that's, this is really the thing
that we're driving,
or I'm driving at today.
I mean,
this is the most critical element.
And to reinforce this,
so let's take a look at what's
going on in terms of working sets.
Say you've got, you know,
so you've got a system working set which
basically consists of like the finder,
the dock,
all of the little demons and things
that run behind or back to make
the system work the way it does.
Wired memory in the kernel.
There's a whole bunch of stuff
that just kind of sits there.
Some other set of applications,
and I threw in, you know,
IE and mail as some typical
things that might be running
on the system all the time.
Stuff that you probably would never,
you know, you never really quit.
It doesn't have to be our mail program,
but any mail program.
So say at this point,
the sum of all the working sets,
so the things that everyone,
the working sets that
the apps are keeping hot,
either through their idle loops
or through work that's being
requested or event processing,
whatever.
Say that that represents 80% of the
physical memory that's available.
At this point, this is really good.
You've got 20% headroom here.
The system is going to feel very snappy.
You're going to be able to do
things with the applications
that you haven't been doing,
and they're going to basically be able to
happen without any page outs occurring.
The user is going to be
pretty happy in this case.
But now let's say the user decides
he wants to listen to some music,
so he brings iTunes up.
So now iTunes is put in the background
and he kind of forgets about it and
it's playing elevator music or whatever.
It's just providing some
entertainment for him.
And say that that, again,
this is not to scale,
not to say that iTunes utilizes 15%
of any physical memory footprint,
but let's say that and maybe some
other apps that were launched
pushed this up to 95%. Well,
at this point,
as long as you don't sneeze,
the system is still going to be fine.
So basically, don't touch it,
don't ask it to do anything
that it isn't already doing,
and it's probably going to be okay.
But there's very little headroom here.
At this point,
almost anything that you do
that you haven't been doing,
so if you launch another application,
if you print and you haven't
printed in a long time,
almost anything major that
you do is probably going to
cause some paging to happen.
But it's still not, you know,
it's not fatal.
Basically what will end up happening
is there will be a little blip and
then things will settle back down and,
you know, okay, fine.
You know, it didn't feel quite as
good as it could have,
but it wasn't horrible.
All right.
Now let's throw in, let's say, your app,
for instance.
And again, not to say that any one app is
going to take this much space,
but, you know,
just for purposes of keeping this short.
And we push the working set up to 125%.
So the sum of all the working sets.
So this is, you know, every second,
basically, you're trying to touch
memory that represents 125%
of your physical footprint.
You are now in, like, no man's land.
This is, your system is thrashing.
You don't want to be here.
Anything that you do,
anything that you try to do is
just going to be painfully slow.
And there's not a whole
lot we can do about it.
I mean, if the memory is being touched,
we have to shuffle it in and out.
And we do our best,
but we can only go so fast.
All right,
so how do we avoid that situation?
We go on the system resource diet.
Okay, so again,
we've been talking about this.
You need to minimize your working set,
right?
And a couple of good ways to do this.
Lazy initialization, right?
So when your app launches,
don't initialize everything that it could
possibly do and touch a bunch of memory.
Wait until the user actually
requests a particular service.
I know a lot of apps have a
lot of really cool features,
but they're not always used,
and certainly they're not always used.
Event-driven, again,
we talked about that and we've
talked about that in other sessions,
I'm sure.
That will tend to really
help control the working set.
don't optimize at the
expense of efficiency.
So again,
if you look at it in isolation and you're
trying to improve a particular aspect
of performance in your application,
and you choose to do this by, say,
creating a very large
cache because you say,
hey, the disks are too slow,
I don't want to deal with it.
I'm going to pull all
my data that I need,
I'm going to slam it into a cache,
and that's what I'm going to use.
Well, your app may actually
end up running slower,
depending upon what the other
needs of the system are,
other applications that are running.
You can't assume that you can
have all the physical memory,
right?
There are other apps running,
they need to share that.
And what will happen is your
cache will just get ending
up being paged in and out.
And it will be paged in and
out at our discretion and
the patterns that we choose.
And that may end up making your app,
you know,
just not run as well as it could.
Caches are not necessarily evil,
but they should be used, you know,
as a cache.
If you're going to be accessing
a particular cluster of data,
you know,
over a very short period of time, sure,
pull it in, keep it in the cache,
but basically understand that it
might be better for you to release
it when you're done and then recreate
it later when you need it again
as opposed to letting it go out,
depending upon how long it, you know,
takes you to create it.
You have to monitor
efficiency during development,
right?
This is not something that
you can do after the fact,
or it's not done easily after the fact.
You want to watch your CPU usage,
memory footprint, file system IOs.
I'm going to talk about the tools
here in a couple minutes and,
you know,
how you would apply the tools to do this,
but this is really critical.
If you're not monitoring,
you don't know where you're at.
Don't test in isolation.
So once you've decided that
your app is performing okay,
come up with some kind of a test
scenario that includes half a dozen or,
you know, seven,
eight other applications that you
think that your customer might have
actively running on the system.
And remember that, again,
we're encouraging them to
leave the apps running,
right?
I mean, that's what the dock is for.
People launch applications.
A week later,
they're still sitting in the dock, right?
They've forgotten that
they even launched it.
If that app is continuously polling,
you know,
it's putting a load on the system.
It's not doing anything for
the user at that point other
than chewing up resources.
All right, so here's a recipe.
This is a basic recipe
for improving efficiency.
And they're really, you know,
they're probably different ways
that you can cut this a little bit,
but basically it all boils down to
having some process that you can repeat.
And something that is measurable.
So you want to set a goal, right?
You don't want to just
go into it thinking,
well, I'll just start, you know,
making my code more efficient
and we'll see where we,
you know, kind of get to.
You want to set a goal.
You want to look at how much memory
you're using currently and say,
you know,
let's see if I can cut that down by
a third or cut that down by half,
right?
Set a very aggressive goal.
Identify a metric that you can measure,
right?
And then measure it.
Get yourself a baseline.
Really understand what your
app is doing at this point.
Once you've done that,
use the tools that we're going
to talk about to analyze where
that memory usage is coming from.
So where in your application are you
actually allocating all that heap space?
And then go through, analyze,
apply the changes that
will bring that usage down,
and then iterate until the goal is met.
It's not a one-step process.
Often you're going to have
to go through this six,
seven,
eight times in order to actually hit
the goal that you've set for yourself.
it's unlikely that you're going
to catch it the very first time.
Okay, improving performance.
So, it's the same recipe.
So,
I'm asking you to improve efficiency.
Your customers are asking
you to improve performance,
right, or specific performance
aspects of your product.
You can use the same
recipe for doing this,
right?
You set a goal,
select a metric which will be
different than one for efficiency,
right?
Measure it, apply, and iterate.
I mean, this will work, right?
This works every time.
Now, the thing to remember is you should
be monitoring all those efficiency
metrics while you're doing this
so that while you're improving
your performance in one area,
you don't want to become less efficient
in terms of your fundamental usage.
All right,
so here are some tools that we can
use to actually go after this stuff.
So to look at what you're
doing in terms of CPU usage,
I've broken these things
up into two categories,
basically, the tools.
There are tools for monitoring,
which basically just give you
an idea of where you stand,
right,
what--how your--or how much of these
system resources that you're consuming.
So a good one for CPU usage,
an easy one to use is top with either
the minus D or the minus A option.
The D option just gives you a snapshot,
basically, you know, a delta,
so what happened in the last period,
one second period, five second period,
whatever period that you select.
The minus A option is kind of
interesting because it basically is
an--it accumulates all of the data
from the point that you launched top,
and it gives you a snapshot then of
what happened from that point through to
the point where you decide to stop it.
So it's really useful for kind
of getting an idea of what
impact you have on the system,
like when you launch an app or
you do a particular operation
like maybe print or save a file.
You could start top with the minus
A option up right before you start
the operation and then shut it down
right as the operation finishes,
and it'll kind of tell you, okay,
for that period of time, you know,
this was my impact on the system.
I used this percentage of
the data to get this data.
So it's a really useful tool,
and it's really useful to be able
to make these kind of things happen.
So I think that's a good point.
And then the last thing, I think,
is that you can use the D or the minus
A option to get the data from the
point that you launched the operation.
So you could start with
the minus A option,
and then you path was to
that particular primitive.
There's Thread Viewer, which will,
if you've got a
multi-threaded application,
is very useful in terms of
determining which threads are,
you know, actually consuming the CPU.
And then Shikari and
Monster are two new apps,
or two new utilities,
that have a lot of power for really
drilling down and finding out
what you're doing to the hardware,
right?
So this basically gives you full access
to all the performance registers,
you know,
either on an individual application
basis or on a system-wide basis.
But if you want to find out,
or if you care what your cache hit
rate is or how many branches per
second that you're executing or,
you know, on and on and on,
those tools can, you know,
really give you that view.
Okay, for memory footprint, again, top,
just the basic default top will
give you a pretty good view of
what's going on in terms of how
much memory you're utilizing.
Top-minus-W gives you a lot more
detail and also will provide you with
a kind of running delta of what's
happened since you launched top.
So if you run it that way
and you watch it over time,
you can see whether or not your
memory footprint is actually growing.
And it will detail that for you.
So that's a pretty good
one to run longer term.
Like if you had an automated test suite,
for instance, and you fired that up,
I would fire up
top-minus-W along with it,
let the automated test suite
run for however many hours
or days that you run it,
and then take a look at kind of,
you know, how much, you know,
did you grow in terms of
your memory consumption.
Leaks, okay, so again,
after you've been running for a while,
run leaks, right?
Sometimes the leaks are small enough
that you may not really notice them,
but if they're, like,
as we talked about earlier,
if they're there,
they do add up over time.
So you want to keep, you know,
kind of on top of that.
Don't let it go to the last minute.
And then for analysis, we have heap,
which will tell you where things are,
I guess, organized,
where your mallocs are sitting.
Malloc debug and object alloc which
is more for our Objective-C friends,
I think.
File system I/O monitoring.
Top-minus-D is good again.
That just gives you a good
indication whether or not there's
any file I/O going on at all,
right?
If you see file I/O going on to
the disks or through the network,
top will show you either.
Then FS usage is a good tool for
monitoring and getting a better
view as to what's going on.
If you've used FS usage before,
we've added a couple of new
things to it for Jaguar.
It now actually reports any physical
I/Os that are actually occurring and
also the physical block address on the
disk and how much I/O actually occurred.
So you can really get a feel for
how random the performance of
the disk really is in terms of
the I/Os that you're issuing,
where they're actually
being pulled from the disk.
It also breaks that up into plain data
versus metadata versus VM operations.
So it gives you a pretty clear picture
of what you're doing to the disk.
Sampler has a nice feature in
it that you can basically tell
it to sit on any I/O operation.
So you just kind of click a box, say,
"I want to know any time
an I/O operation is called,
please record the callback stack for
me so I can find out how I got to
that point." That's a very powerful
way to be able to track where all
the I/O is coming from because
sometimes you don't issue it directly,
right?
It's some API that you're calling
that ends up being a fairly expensive
operation in terms of file system I/O.
So this would allow you
to see that that API,
maybe you don't want to do
that API in your polling loop.
So, in closing, applications that perform
efficiently should be your goal.
We want you, you know,
we want all those great features.
We want your apps to perform well,
but we want them to perform efficiently
because that makes our customers happy,
right?
That makes the whole system feel better.
And it makes, quite frankly, you know,
[Transcript missing]
First, I want to thank Joe for
an excellent presentation.
I hope you got a lot out of that.
Some references.
The Mac OS X System Overview book
is always a useful reference for
understanding the system architecture
and how and where to get things done.
Mac OS X Performance talks a
lot about the same principles
that Joe's been talking about,
and they're available both on your
disk in PDF form or as print-on-demand
through the developer website.
We have our Tools page on
Apple Developer Connection where we
talk about all of our performance
tools and performance tools
available from the third-party world.
A roadmap for today.
Okay, in this session we have drilled
rather deeply into principles
of developing for performance.
In the next session in the tools track
we are going to talk about the compilers.
And a good way of getting
good performance out of your
applications is to understand
your compilation environment,
understand exactly what the
compiler is doing and where
we are going with compilers.
That is in room J immediately
following this session.
This afternoon we have both the
development tools feedback forum
in room J1 and session 908,
which is not listed on this slide
for reasons beyond my control.
Session 908 talks about getting
the most out of project builder to
utilize the best of the build system.
And again the last session of the day,
debugging in Mac OS X right in this room,
5:00 this evening.
And with that I would like to invite
the Q&A panel up to the stage.
For contact, discussion of performance,
performance tools,
if you have any need to get in
touch with the engineering team,
our development tools
engineering feedback address,
macos10-tools-feedback
at group.apple.com.
That's beginning to roll
off my tongue lightly now.
is a useful way of contacting the entire
development tools engineering group,
and I am always available
as a primary contact.